This video contains an exercise associated with the previous video on histogram and probabilities.
So what you want to do in this exercise is generate these three functions so Y equals X Y equals X squared
and Y equals X cubed.
And then what you want to do is make a graph and draw the probability densities for each of these functions.
So you're going to end up with a figure in Python that has two rows and three columns where the top
row is the function itself and the bottom row is the probability density of these functions.
Now I will let you pick the x axis range but I recommend using something that's fairly narrow.
Close to zero.
So for example you could set X to go from minus three to plus three.
All right.
So pause the video.
Do some coding and when you're ready you can come back and watch me talk you through my solution so
I am going to start by I think I'll even just get rid of all this stuff.
Okay so let's see.
I'm going to start by setting the x axis range so let's say x equals num pi Lynn space.
I will go from minus three to plus three.
And how about let's try one hundred and twenty three steps.
So now I'm going to start by setting up the figure.
So I'm going to write fig comma X equals L to the sub plots and we want a two by three geometry of subplots.
So I'm going to do this in a loop so I'm going to write for I in range 3 and then the idea is that this
AI is going to correspond to not only the Axis index but also the exponent for the function.
So I'm going to create the function and it's his sto Graham said see Y equals X to the power of.
And now here you have to be a bit careful because it's not actually I.
It's actually I plus 1.
And the reason for that is that when you loop through this for loop I is going to start off at zero
and then it's gonna go 1 and 2.
And so actually to show you that let's just write this just print out here.
So this is going to be the exponents.
However we don't want the function to be X to the 0 x or the 1 and x the 2 it has to be X to the power
of 1 which is just X and then X squared and then X cubed.
So therefore this has to be I plus 1 here in the exponent.
Okay.
And now I'm going to create the histogram.
OK.
I'll just call that variable H num paid up his sto gram of variable Y and then I want to normalize.
So I'll call this Y P as I did in the previous video.
Equals h 0 divided by the sum of all of h zero.
So let's just make sure we understand what's going on here.
So here we generate the function Y equals X to the power of you know whatever the looping index is.
Then we get a histogram and the histogram function is going to give to output.
So that's going to be in this tuple and this variable H.
So then we want to create a probability density and I'm going to do that by normalizing the Y the counts
from this histogram function.
And that is in the first element of this tuple h.
Okay.
So then.
So that's all the computations we need to do.
Now we need to do some plotting.
So I'll start by plotting the function itself.
So this is going to be zero corresponding to the first row and then I corresponding to the I S column
dot plot and then we want X comma Y and then I will set a title so x 0 comma I and then set title and
that title is going to be Y equals X to the power of.
And so to get the superscript here for the power I want to do all this stuff in latex so I'm going to
convert that to latex use the carat symbol to get me a superscript and then this is going to be % G
which we then replace with I.
Not I but I plus 1.
Okay.
And then before worrying about the histogram on the bottom row I want to just make sure this is going
to look correct.
All right.
So this is what we expect for Y equals X.
It's just a straight line of course so all the y values equal all the x values and we want Y equals
X squared which looks like this and Y equals X cubed which again looks like this.
All right.
So far so good except this figure looks a little bit crowded.
So what I'm gonna do is set the size of this.
I will use fig dots set size inches.
It's a little bit.
You know America centric here that we have to specify in inches and not in centimeters.
But what can you do.
And let's say 10 inches wide by six inches high.
So this is starting to look much better now let's go back and finish this exercise by plotting the distribution
of values or the probability density.
So there we want X 1 comma I.
So that's going to correspond to the second row and the eighth column and then it's going to be plot.
Let's see.
So that will be.
Now the second part of the tuple of H.
And remember that here we don't want to just plot y p like this.
Instead we need to not only the first values up to the final point and the reason for this is because
of what I discussed in the previous video on how to interpret the output of the histogram function.
And I'm also going to talk more about this business in the next video.
All right.
Let's see how this looks.
So these plots look OK.
They look fairly smooth these histogram here probability densities don't really they look kind of choppy.
What I would like to do is break this up into more bins.
So I would like to have more bins.
So in the previous video I showed you how to use the second input in histogram to specify all the bin
boundaries.
But if you don't want to specify the exact boundaries of the bends instead you just want to specify
the number of bins.
Then you can simply enter that as a second input into the histogram function.
So I write come a 50 and l python is going to give me 50 bins in total.
So notice how blocky this is here and then with 50 bins for the histogram.
This gets quite a bit smoother but you know I think there's still I think we don't have a high enough
resolution.
Now this looks really choppy.
But notice that these are all really really tiny values.
This is actually a very small range.
I think what I'll do is increase the resolution here to 1000.
Let's see how that looks.
This is starting to look really nice.
Okay.
This looks better.
So now we have lots and lots and lots of data points and 50 bins for these histogram.
Okay.
So now that is actually the successful completion of the code for this exercise.
What I want to take a moment for now is to interpret these plots a little bit.
So this top row should be already pretty familiar to you.
But the bottom row might seem a little bit weird.
And that's not so surprising.
It's not always so intuitive or immediately obvious what a probability density function should look
like based on what a mathematical function looks like.
This is actually similar to the calculus section when we were looking at derivatives of functions and
you saw that the derivative of function can often look really sort of a lot different from the actual
function itself.
So what does this mean that we have a flat line here.
Well this basically means that all of the values between minus three and plus three are equally likely
to be selected at random.
So if you look at this function and you say what is the probability what's the chance that I would pick
this value just randomly picking out any value anywhere.
What's the chance that you would get this value what's the chance you would get this value and all of
these values are equally likely to be picked.
So that's why the probability distribution is flat.
Now let's go to this function here y equals X squared again what is the chance that you will get a value
of let's say 4 given that you're just picking a number purely at random.
Well the probability of guessing four or you know sort of picking a value of four is actually relatively
small.
You're much much more likely to get a value that's really close to zero.
And that should also make sense when you think about this function Y equals X squared.
Because there's a lot more data points close to zero and fewer data points on the y axis as you get
further away from zero.
So this is a little tricky to think about because on the x axis all of these points are equally far
away from each other.
And that's sort of trivially defined by this variable x.
However for this function Y equals X squared on the y axis these points are actually getting further
and further apart from each other.
So they are less likely on the y axis as you get further away from zero on the x axis and maybe let's
see if we plot this the density might be a little too high for this to look really.
Yeah okay.
You still see a lot of numbers here.
Let's see what happens if we go to for example 500 maybe.
Mm hmm.
Okay let's try again with 100 although now I think the histogram won't look good.
Okay.
So let's try this.
I'm going to set this to be 10 points and now we don't look at the histogram.
They all look terrible but the point is you can see in these functions that as you're getting further
away from zero on the x axis the data points are getting sparse and sparse there on the y axis.
And that is why when you look at the probability density you're much more likely to guess a point randomly
close to zero than a point further away from zero.
And now we have Y equals X cubed which actually is a really similar function to X squared except that
we also have negative values whereas X squared of course has no negative values.
So if you look to the right of zero.
This function looks really similar to this probability density here.
But the difference is that we also have negative values here.
I hope you enjoyed working on this exercise and learning about histogram probability densities and the
relationship to different mathematical functions in the next video.
We are going to continue talking about histogram and probability densities for continuous data like
these kinds of mathematical functions that you were just working on.
I will see you soon.